docs : ADR - Implement serverless real time (#170)
theodo/workflow-monitor: docs/adr_1-implement_serverless_real_time.md

# Implement serverless real time

* Status: proposed
* Deciders: MaximeT, NicolasB, LoicC, AxelB, CorentinD
* Date: 26-06-2019

## Context and Problem Statement

> We want to migrate the backend of a website to AWS serverless. We want use serverless to be more familiar with this technology.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to migrate the backend of a website to a serverless architecture with AWS Lambdas. Even if it looks more complex than using a container with the node/graphQL server for example, we chose to use serverless to be more familiar with this technology.
```

The website implements a realtime feature to keep all the instances of frontends of a user synchronized.

The current stack is :
* Frontend : React with Apollo Client
* Backend : NestJs with its GraphQl module which use Apollo Server. The ORM is Sequelize

> * DataBase : Postgres

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Frontend : React with Apollo Client
* Backend : NestJs with Apollo Server as GraphQL module, Sequelize as ORM
* DataBase : PostgreSQL
Every layers are deployed on the same virtual machine on an openstack instance for now.
```

## Decision Drivers

> * The frontend should send GraphQl requests to get or mutate entities from the DB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The frontend should send GraphQL queries and mutations to the backend
```

> * The authentication route is custom and use a JWT to check the identity after.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* JWT Token based authentication, issued by the backend
```

> * The frontend should be able to subscribe to the topics of its user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The frontend should receive real time updates only for the connected user's data.
```

> * The frontend should not be able to subscribe to the topics of other users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An user A MUST NOT access an user B data
```

> * The publications in topics are made by the backend after some migrations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The backend MUST send real time updates to the connected client immediatly
```

> * The message should be received by the subscribers just after the migration request is made without perceptible latency.

Reviewer: ça tu peux supprimer :)

## Considered Options

### 1. MQTT Broker (AWS IoT)
* Pro : 

Functional broker out the box which could communicate with web client.

> Simple to understand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Pro:**

* Functional broker out of the box able to communicate with a web client.
* Simple to understand.
```

* Cons : 

The authentication is optimized for Cognito and [custom authorizer does not work with web client](https://github.com/aws/aws-iot-device-sdk-js/issues/169).

> 

Reviewer: It is a an IoT protocol, it seams not made for this kind of problem.

> &rarr; Hard to implement our authentication

Reviewer: il faut que tu sois un peu plus spécifique : quels sont les trucs qu'on veut faire qui ne seront pas possibles ? l'histoire des trucs qui durent 1h etc...

* Schema :

![MQTT schema](Schema_serverless_pubsub_mqtt.png)

### 2. AWS AppSync

* Pro : 

Serverless solution designed to build real time web app with GraphQl.

> Simple to use.

Reviewer: détails : il suffit de coller le schema graphQL pour que ça génère le endpoint et qu'on puisse faire des queries direct...

* Cons : 

> Should (must) be used with Cognito. [Very hard to implement custom authorizers](https://github.com/aws/aws-appsync-community/issues/2).

Reviewer: Est-ce que tu peux plus détailler ce qu'il faut faire avec Cognito pour que ce soit utilisable (peut-être compléter les drivers ?) et montrer en quoi c'est dur ?

Aussi rajouter le fait qu'il faille intégrer les règles métiers dans des lambdas dans appsync. A toi de voir si c'est un pro ou cons.

&rarr; Very hard to implement our authentication

* Schema :

![AppSync schema](appsync_schema.png)

### 3. Custom broker of Michalkvasnicak

Use the package [aws-lambda-graphql](https://github.com/michalkvasnicak/aws-lambda-graphql)
* Pro : 

> Solution designed to use GraphQl PubSub in serverless.

Reviewer: The package is developed to setup a PubSub solution for subscriptions in GraphQL.

> Seems to be the serverless way to implement real time.

Reviewer: je crois que tu as compris mes retours ;)

* Cons : 

Performances : latency between the mutation request and the reception of the subscribed message

> Complicate schema &rarr; hard to understand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Complex architecture &rarr; hard to understand, debug and maintain
```

* Schemas :

![my schema of Michalkvasnicak solution](my_schema_of_Michalkvasnicak_solution.jpg)

![Michalkvasnicak schema](michalkvasnicak_schema.svg)

### 4. Develop our own custom broker from the solution 3

Start from the [aws-lambda-graphql](https://github.com/michalkvasnicak/aws-lambda-graphql), remove unnecessary things and try to improve the performances. 

* Pro : 

> Able us to completely custom the solution to match all the decisions drivers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It allows us to tailor-make a solution matching all the decision drivers.
```

> Seems to be the serverless way to implement real time.

Reviewer: ajoute les liens vers tes articles ?

* Cons : 

Long to develop

No certainty about the results

> Complicate schema &rarr; hard to understand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Complex architecture &rarr; hard to understand, debug and maintain
```

The current stack is :
* Frontend : React with Apollo Client
* Backend : NestJs with Apollo Server as GraphQL module, Sequelize as ORM
* DataBase : PostgreSQL
Every layers are deployed on the same virtual machine on an openstack instance for now.

## Decision Drivers

* The frontend should send GraphQL queries and mutations to the backend
* JWT Token based authentication, issued by the backend
* The frontend should receive real time updates only for the connected user's data.
* An user A MUST NOT access an user B data
* The backend MUST send real time updates to the connected client immediately

## Considered Options

### 1. MQTT Broker (AWS IoT)

**Pro:**

* Functional broker out of the box able to communicate with a web client.
* Simple to understand.

**Cons:**

* The frontend authentication is only optimized for Cognito and
 [custom authorizer does not work with web client](https://github.com/aws/aws-iot-device-sdk-js/issues/169).
The work around consist in requesting temporary credentials with custom policy to STS through the backend every hour 
&rarr; The simplicity of use is KO.   

> * It is a an IoT protocol, it seams not made for this kind of problem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* It is a an IoT protocol, it seems not made for this kind of problem.
```

**Schema:**

![MQTT schema](Schema_serverless_pubsub_mqtt.png)

### 2. AWS AppSync

**Pro:**

* Serverless solution designed to build real time web app with GraphQl.

> * Simple to use : only need to provide GraphQl schema and resolver templates to generate an available graphql endpoint 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Easy to use: providing GraphQl schema and resolver templates is enough to generate an available GraphQL endpoint 
```

which support GraphQl subscription.

> * Complex use case could be dealt with custom lambda resolvers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Complex use case could be solved using custom lambda resolvers.
```

**Cons:** 

* The authorization types handle by AppSync are : API_KEY, AWS_IAM, OPENID_CONNECT and AMAZON_COGNITO_USER_POOLS.
 [There is no proper way to implement custom authorizers](https://github.com/aws/aws-appsync-community/issues/2). 
 The work around is to create a pipeline of resolvers where the first resolvers is a lambda which check the authentication 

> &rarr; Hard to implement our authentication.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
&rarr; Implementing JWT authentication will need a lot of work.
```

Reviewer 2: How much?

> * Too much refactor : using AppSync require to build an other backend from scratch. There are few pieces of code which could be kept.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Too much refactor : using AppSync require to build an other backend from scratch. There are only a few pieces of code which could be kept.
```

**Schema:**

![AppSync schema](appsync_schema.png)

### 3. Custom broker of Michalkvasnicak

Use the package [aws-lambda-graphql](https://github.com/michalkvasnicak/aws-lambda-graphql)

> **Pro:** 

Reviewer 2: need a break line

* Solution designed to migrate our stack to AWS serverless :
 The package is developed to setup a PubSub solution for subscriptions in GraphQL.
* Seems to be the serverless way to implement real time, the solution is only made of serverless basic components : 
Api GateWay, lambdas and dynamoDb

**Cons:** 

> * Performances : latency between the mutation request and the reception of the subscribed message

Reviewer 2: How much?

* Complex architecture &rarr; hard to understand, debug and maintain

**Schemas:**

![my schema of Michalkvasnicak solution](my_schema_of_Michalkvasnicak_solution.jpg)

![Michalkvasnicak schema](michalkvasnicak_schema.svg)

### 4. Develop our own custom broker from the solution 3

Start from the [aws-lambda-graphql](https://github.com/michalkvasnicak/aws-lambda-graphql), remove unnecessary things and try to improve the performances. 

**Pro:** 

* It allows us to tailor-make a solution matching all the decision drivers.
* Seems to be the serverless way to implement real time, the solution is only made of serverless basic components : 
Api GateWay, lambdas and dynamoDb

**Cons:** 

> * Long to develop

Reviewer 2: How much?

> * No certainty about the results

Reviewer 2: why?

* Complex architecture &rarr; hard to understand, debug and maintain
 
**Schema:** 
 
 current schema
 ![custom broker schema](DynamoDb_pubsub_serverless.png)
 
 ### 5. Serverless components : realtime-app
 
 Use the package [serverless-components/realtime-app/](https://github.com/serverless-components/realtime-app/).
 It's a Component of [Serverless Components](https://github.com/serverless/components).
 
 The pitch of Serverless Components :

>  "It's a framework for provisioning and composing cloud services into higher-level abstractions, like features and applications. It depends on external Components, which are javascript libraries that can provision something, like infrastructure or a whole software feature built on multiple pieces of infrastructure." 

Reviewer 2: Tu peux utiliser le chevron (>) pour ajouter une blockquote
Exemple :

> It's a framework for provisioning and composing...

 
 It's an overlay of the framework [Serverless](https://serverless.com/) 
 
 **Pro:** 
 
 * Solution designed to implement real time in serverless
 * It implements [Serverless components](https://github.com/serverless/components) which make the solution easy to deploy :

>  a une command to create the AWS infrastructure (if it does not exist) and deploy new code on it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 only one command to create the AWS infrastructure (if it does not exist) and deploy new code on it.
```

 
 **Cons:** 

>  * No mention of offline development

Reviewer 2: why you need that?

>  * All the code which deal with realtime data must be on an unique lambda &rarr; for us that means to deploy all our backend in one lambda

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * All the code which deal with realtime data must be on a unique lambda &rarr; for us that means to deploy all our backend in one lambda
```
Why?

>  * New package without proper documentations

Reviewer 2: What is a problem of New package ?

Author: There is no docs and probably some bugs : when I tested the package, there is a functionality I didn't manage to use, I don't know if I badly used the package our if it's a bug.

 
**Schema:** 
 
![one lambda schema](Serverless_Pubsub_One_Lambda.png)

> ## Decision Outcome

Reviewer 2: Add a breakline

> Chosen option: "4. Develop our own custom broker from the solution 3", because the three first options lead us to dead ends 

Reviewer 2: Not sure about the why of this decision. The 2nd solution could be ok no ?

> and the infrastructure of the last one create an unique huge lambda which is KO.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and the infrastructure of the last one create a unique huge lambda which is KO.
```

Reviewer 2: Why it's KO?
